---
title: SwiftUI
noindex: true
toc: true
---

# SwiftUI

Want to learn it to some non-trivial extent (which I never have before) so that I can start actually using it in anger for apps and look for jobs using it.

## Initial Apple tutorial

Starting with [Apple’s tutorial](https://developer.apple.com/tutorials/swiftui) (the Landmarks app), 2024-02-16. Actually, it's the "Introducing SwiftUI tutorial" (there are a few different tutorials, others e.g. more principles-based).

### SwiftUI essentials

##### Creating and combining views

- entry point is something conforming to the `App` protocol, with `@main` annotation
- the `ContentView` that it comes with has a `#Preview` at the bottom:

  ```swift
  #Preview {
    ContentView()
  }
  ```

- (Editor -> Canvas to see the view preview if not there)
- not sure what the `.padding()` in the `ContentView` that comes with the template is doing
- canvas displays in Live mode by default (so you can interact), but to use the inspectors (for editing) change to Selectable mode
- Command-Control-click in preview to bring up the "structured editing popover" (you can also right click in the editor to bring up the SwiftUI Inspector)
- `body` has to return a single view — use stacks to return multiple
- `.font(.title)` — get comfortable with using these type sizes (they then use `.subheadline` for something else; perhaps use this tutorial as a reference for now
- `foregroundColor` is "Inherited" by default
- it also shows adding a `Text` view by dragging it from the library (plus button in top right)
- by default stacks align along axis "and provide context-appropriate spacing" (?) — they switch to `(alignment: .leading)`
- next they use a `Spacer` to instruct the layout to use the full width of the device
- Things like padding have always made me very anxious, perhaps I shouldn't care so much about trying to get them right

Now we're going to add an image and put some nice effects on it (mask, border, drop shadow), creating a `CircleView`

Asset catalogs are still the way of getting images into project

- we use the `.clipShape(Circle())` modifier
  - note that a `Circle` is a `Shape` which is a `View`
- and then we use the `.overlay { ... }` modifier (which I need to understand better but which seems to be some shorthand for creating a `ZStack`, end result being that overlay content ends up on top)
- we now see `Shape`’s `.stroke()` modifier which gives you the outline of the shape
- and then the `.shadow(radius: 7)` modifier — not clear to me how this knows to give a circle-shaped shadow

Next we add a map.

- we use the `Map` from from `MapKit`

  > When you import SwiftUI and certain other frameworks in the same file, you gain access to SwiftUI-specific functionality provided by that framework.

- its initializer takes an `initialPosition`
- when adding the map, we use the `.frame(height: 300)` modifier — understand better how this modifier is usually used
- they then use a combination of `.offset` and negative `.padding` modifiers to put one view on top of another (understand this idiom better)
- then they "Add a spacer at the bottom of the outer `VStack` to push the content to the top of the screen." (another idiom to understand)
- and they introduce the use of the `.foregroundStyle(.secondary)` modifier on a couple of the labels, which (another idiom to understand, why you don't just set the colour explicitly) gives a grey colour to the text

##### Building lists and navigation

After some initial faffing around…

- we create `LandmarkRow`
- we see the `resizable()` modifier (look into this) used on an `Image`; I notice that without this the `.frame(width: 50, height: 50)` modifier still shows a huge image
- we add a second `#Preview` and see how Xcode’s canvas lets us switch between them
- we use the `#Preview` argument to add a name
- we also see you you can show multiple views in a single preview by putting them in a `Group`
  - my understanding here is that `Group` by itself offers no layout logic, but a _preview_ with a group shows them stacked in the canvas
- next we see `List` and create a `LandmarkList` view
- we then see how to create a list from a collection of identifiable data
  - here, you make it _identifiable_ either by providing a _key path_ to the unique identifier, or by conforming to `Identifiable`
  - a closure gives a view for each element

Now we’re going to add navigation.

- embed list in `NavigationSplitView` (they do this inside `LandmarkList`)… - second argument of `NavigationSplitView` is a placeholder (this is only relevant for iPad)
- we add a `.navigationTitle("Landmarks")` modifier to the `NavigationSplitView` content view
- …and then nest the row in a `NavigationLink` to set up a transition
  - first argument provides the detail view
  - second argument is the "label" and that’s our row view

Notice that they pass an `Image` directly into a view; this suggests that `Image` is a thing you can use as a view or as a piece of data?

- "Change the map’s initializer to one that takes a position input so that it updates when the value changes."
  - No idea what this is about; they pass a `.constant(…)` binding, why?
- they then switch to using a `ScrollView` inside `LandmarkDetail` (instead of a `VStack`) so that it can be scrolled

(How do we preview what a view will look like in a navigation stack?)

- they use `.navigationBarTitleDisplayMode(.inline)` on the detail view
  - I need to understand these options

Now we look at previews a bit more.

- by default (i.e. the "Automatic" option at top of canvas’s device list) the preview uses the device chosen next to the scheme selector
- the canvas also has a Device Settings section, which lets you choose colour scheme, orientation, and dynamic type options. the little grid button also lets you see all of these variants for a given property.
- you can even choose your iOS device, and it seems to open some sort of "Xcode Previews" app — in my experience, when I tried to update the view it just went blank on my device though (actually, only for one view; the others worked)

##### Handling user input

We're going to add favouriting of places: a switch (sorry, a `Toggle`) to filter the list by favourites, and a button to favourite an item.

- we see how to use `if landmark.isFavorite` to conditionally include a view
- we see using `Image(systemName: "star.fill")` (I think this is related to SF Symbols, something to look into)
- we see using the `.foregroundStyle(.yellow)` modifier on this filled star (remember we used it with `.secondary` before); apparently this works "because system images are vector based"
  - I note there’s also a deprecated `.foregroundColor` modifier; why did they decide `foregroundStyle` a better name?

OK, so the filtering of the list is the first place we see state (`showFavoritesOnly` on list, accompanied by a `filteredLandmarks` computed property)

(Note that SwiftLint has a rule that makes sure that state is private, in line with the guidance given in this tutorial)

And now we see bindings ("a _binding_ acts as a reference to a mutable state"). "You use the $ prefix to access a binding to a state variable, or one of its properties." We pass it as the `Toggle`’s `isOn`.

- We add a static view to the list, and see that to do this we embed a `ForEach` in the list and pass the collection to that instead.
- and then, the `Toggle`’s second argument is a closure that provides the "label" (which can be any view, e.g. a `Text`)

Notice that there’s no animation of the list when we flip the switch. To solve this, they add a `.animation(.default, value: filteredLandmarks)` modifier to the list. Hopefully we’ll learn more about this modifier in the Eidhof SwiftUI book, so won’t think much about it now; but it's something to do with applying the animation when given `value` changes.

So, now we change our static list of landmarks, stored inside the list, into an external data source. To do this, we create a `ModelData` class and annotate it with the `@Observable` macro (well, it says it’s a macro, but I can’t figure out how to expand it…).

> SwiftUI updates a view only when an observable property changes **and the view’s body reads the property directly**.

(emphasis mine here — important to bear in mind that SwiftUI is paying attention to what gets accessed whilst a view’s `body` is executing)

And now (for reasons I still need to understand — i.e. what might the alternatives be, why is this the right way to do things, how would it be in React?) we tell the `LandmarkList` to grab this data from the environment:

```swift
@Environment(ModelData.self) var modelData
```

No idea why `ModelData.self` can be used as the environment key here — think about it again after reading the environment chapter in the book.

At this point, the `ContentView` preview just started crashing — with a macOS crash report dialog, with no useful information. Adding `.environment(ModelData())` fixed this.

And now we do the same in the app, except there we create the `ModelData` instance as part of the app’s state, and then pass it down through `.environment(modelData)` (again, why does this not require a specific key — are types a special kind of key?). Before doing this, running the app crashes with:

```
SwiftUI/Environment+Objects.swift:32: Fatal error: No Observable object of type ModelData found. A View.environmentObject(_:) for ModelData may be missing as an ancestor of this view.
```

(I need to understand better why it’s important that this be `@State` in the app.)

> Just like SwiftUI initializes state in a view only once during the lifetime of the view, it initializes state in an app only once during the lifetime of the app.

Now we see how to manipulate model data in a reusable view, by passing a binding to a property of the observable `ModelData` object.

- add a `@Binding var isSet: Bool` to the our new `FavoriteButton` view
  - need to understand better what `@Binding` is doing
  - note that this _isn’t_ private — it’s something we’ll pass in the initializer
- we get introduced to `Button`
  - first argument is the action — here we do `isSet.toggle()`
  - second is a label, for which we use the first-seen-here `Label` type, whatever that is (is it a text plus an image plus some magic?)
- in the `#Preview`, we pass a `isSet: .constant(true)` binding. Notice that this means that when we press the button the appearance never changes in the preview.

So, inside the `LandmarkDetail` view, in order to get the binding to pass to `FavoriteButton`, we find the index of the current landmark inside `modelData.landmarks`. Then inside `body` we declare an `@Bindable var modelData = modelData` (the latter coming from the environment). No idea what this `@Bindable` step is nor why we do it. And then we pass `$modelData.landmarks[landmarkIndex].isFavorite` to the `FavoriteButton`.

(What is `@Bindable`?)

(It would be instructive to some time understand why this _feels_ so much more complicated than React, in which you basically just have `useState` and `useContext`. Is it because I’ve not yet seen a full app created in React?)

OK, that concludes "SwiftUI essentials". Lots of information there at the end. Now we’ll move back away from the data side of things and do some more presentation stuff.

### Drawing and animation

##### Drawing paths and shapes

We’re going to generate a nice-looking badge that the user gets when they visit a landmark.

- first we draw the badge background — a nice rounded hexagon with a colourful background
- to do this, we use the `Path` view. its initializer receives a closure that takes a `path` arg — looks like we’re going to call methods on this to draw
- we apply the `.fill(.black)` modifier to the path (need to understand this better)
- we put the pen in an initial place with `path.move(to:)` and then add lines to the path with `path.addLine(to:)`
- and then they also use `path.addQuadCurve(to:control:)` to draw some Bézier curves (whatever they are; I’m a bit lost by this point but seems like something to look at later)

Then to get the size of the path we’re meant to be drawing, we wrap the `Path` in a `GeometryReader`, which takes a closure that provides a `geometry` object; we grab its `size.width` and `size.height` (again, one to understand better after seeing the layout chapter in the book)

(This seems like a rather bizarre part of an introduction to SwiftUI — there’s a lot of geometry and maths to plough through)

Now to make the background pretty, we replace the `.fill(.black)` with a `.fill(.linearGradient(…))`, passing a `Gradient` (look into this)

Finally — in another step I don’t really want to try and understand now — they do `.aspectRatio(1, contentMode: .fit)`

Then another view, `BadgeSymbol`, which is more drawing with `Path`.

Next `RotatedBadgeSymbol`. Note there’s a type called `Angle` (why?). Also applies some negative padding to make the badge symbol not quite fit inside (is it meant to be artistic?). And we apply `.rotationEffect(angle, anchor: .bottom)` modifier.

Then we combine the background and multiple `RotatedBadgeSymbol` (with different angles) into a `Badge`.

**Hmm:** why do you have to write `some View` for return type of methods that return `View`? one to look into

We also see the `.opacity(0.5)` modifier

We put the symbol on top of the background with a `ZStack`. The sizes of the two views are completely mismatched (not sure why) so we use a `GeometryReader` and scale the badge symbols using (new to us, look into) `.scaleEffect(1.0 / 4.0, anchor: .top)` and `.position(x: geometry.size.width / 2.0, y: (3.0 / 4.0) * geometry.size.height)` modifiers.

Also we see the `.scaledToFit()` modifier; another mystery.

##### Animating views and transitions

So, we are going to look at some hike data that it gives us, and a view that it gives us, which is a graph that represents ranges of values over time using blobby capsules.

- > 'When you use the `animation(_:)` modifier on an equatable view, SwiftUI animates any changes to animatable properties of the view.

  What is an "equatable view"? They don’t seem to show us this, and instead say that when the view isn’t equatable, you can use the `animation(_:value:)` modifier so that changes to the specified value cause an animation. They demonstrate it with the `showDetail` button, which is a little toggle that rotates and grows (with `.rotationEffect` and `.scaleEffect` (again, look into these).

- they then change the animation type from `.easeInOut` to `.spring()`, although I can’t tell the difference.

So, that showed us how to animate a change to a single view. Now we see how to animate _all the results of a given state change_, by wrapping the state change in the `withAnimation` function. Specifially, we do it inside the button action’s `showDetail.toggle()`.

- we also see how we can pass `withAnimation` the same parameters as the `animation(_:value:)` modifier.

- we make the animation slow so we can see how animations are interruptible

Now we’re going to think about transitions, which I think means when a view is added to or removed from the screen. The default is a fade in/out. We see how we can customise it by using the `.transition(_:)` modifier on the view in question, and passing e.g. `.slide` or `.move(edge:)` or `.asymmetric(insertion:removal:)`. We also see the `.combined(with:)` transition for combining them.

Now we’ll work on animation the capsules on the graph. We create a custom animation by adding a static property to `Animation`. We start by returning `.default` and go on from there.

Oh, so I notice that the `GraphCapsule` view we’re now animating does indeed conform to `Equatable` (see my 'what is an "equatable view"?' above), and we just use `.animation(_:)` but no further explanation.

So, just adding `.animation(_:)` modifier to each `GraphCapsule` has made clicking between the different metrics (elevation, heart rate, pace) to do a nice animation between the graph states, which is nice.

Then they switch it to use `.spring(dampingFraction: 0.5)` — this `dampingFraction` change seems to make it, to my eyes, actually what I’d call "springy" (compare to before when I said I couldn’t tell what `.spring()` was doing).

Then we do `.speed(2)` (which I guess can generically speed up any animation).

(Something to look into sometime — why does the colour not also go springy between the two values?)

Then they do a cool thing where they add a `.delay(:_)` based on the index of the capsule, giving a ripple effect.

(Note: this area of animation design is something I know nothing about, but it’s cool.)

(Note: I see that `HikeGraph` uses a `var path: KeyPath<Hike.Observation, Range<Double>>` to represent the current choice of data. I like `KeyPath` and would like to know explore its uses. I see that they can often be used in place of functions.)

Another thing I missed earlier:

> A `nil` animation for a particular value counteracts a non-`nil` animation for the same value that appears higher in the view hierarchy.

### App design and layout

##### Composing complex interfaces

- Now we work on a horizontally-scrolling list of categories (an `HStack` in a `ScrollView(.horizontal, showsIndicators: false)`).

(I just noticed that Xcode now has a Vim mode; that’s nice.)

- Another new-to-me modifier: `.cornerRadius(_:)`
- and another, which it uses on an `Image`, is `.clipped()`
- and then we see `.listRowInsets(_:)`, which we set to zero so that the content goes right up to the grey outside of the list (i.e. without any white padding inside the list)

(My understanding of how something like `.listRowInsets` (and most other modifiers) work is that this will put something into the environment, and then `List` will read it)

Then some more navigation stuff. Note that, for example, they put the push from `CategoryRow` to `LandmarkDetail` directly inside `CategoryRow`. Presumably there is some sort of architectural kinda-better practice for this?

Now, after putting a `CategoryItem` as the `NavigationLink`’s `label`, we go and undo some of the automatic changes that this causes:

> Text that you pass as the label for a navigation link renders using the environment’s accent color, and images may render as template images. You can modify either behavior to best suit your design.

(I don’t even know what a template image is.)

We do this by:

- `.renderingMode(.original)` on the image
- `.foregroundStyle(.primary)` on the text

Next we see how to use a `TabView`. You pass it a binding to the `selection` (i.e. a piece of state in the view, e.g. some `Tab` enum of your creation)

We use the `tabItem(label:)` modifier to set the tab button for each view — they use a `Label("Featured", systemImage: "star")`, and both the text and image get displayed (I think that there are contexts, possibly some we’ve seen already, in which the label’s text is only used for accessibility).

They also show using the `.tag(_:)` modifier on each of the tab’s views — not sure yet how this is useful.

##### Working with UI controls

Now we’re going to add a profile view and let the user edit (not sure exactly what that means yet) their profile.

> You’ll work with a variety of _common user interface controls for data entry_, and update the Landmarks model types whenever the user saves their changes.

(emphasis mine)

(**Aside:** I was curious to see what happened if I tried to modify some non-`@State` property of a view inside a button’s action. I get `Cannot assign to property: 'self' is immutable`. Fair enough. So what’s special about `@State` that we _can_ assign to it even though we’re not in a `mutating` context?)

Hmm, they have one `Text` to which they do `.bold()` and `.font(.title)`. Is this something you’d do or would you normally trust the style to get it right? Should I care?

Another interesting thing I just saw was _adding_ two `Text` views together (?!):

> `Text("Goal Date: ") + Text(profile.goalDate, style: .date)`

(_and_ the `style: .date` is interesting, too.)

Some sort of trick that’s used to show a badge at a certain size (I don’t know if this is a useful technique or some defect in the way that the badge code was written):

> The badge’s drawing logic produces a result that depends on the size of the frame in which it renders. To ensure the desired appearance, render in a frame of 300 x 300 points. To get the desired size for the final graphic, then scale the rendered result and place it in a comparably smaller frame.

We also see the `.hueRotation(_:)` modifier, whatever that does — seems to be use here as just a way to quickly vary the colours of a badge

- For some reason apropos of nothing it also shows us the `.listStyle(.inset)` modifier here, to remove the grey borders from the list (don’t know why it didn’t show this back when we were creating the list)

  This one is interesting — what does `.listStyle(_:)` do; why is it a modifier and not a property of the `List`?

OK, now we’re going to see how to:

1. add a toolbar button:

   We set the `.toolbar` modifier on one of our views (I’m not sure the impact of which view you set this on). Its initializer just takes content, and we set it to a `Button` (I guess another one of those appearance-depends-on-context things that I don’t know how they are implemented, is it environment?)

2. make that present the profile details view:

   use the `.sheet(isPresented:)` modifier. This takes a binding. The body of the modifier is the content you want to show.

Now we look at "edit mode", whatever that is.

We grab the built-in `@Environment(\.editMode)`, which gives a property of type `Binding<EditMode>?`. How mysterious. Why is this a binding? What's going on?

And to make things more confusing, we then use the built-in `EditButton` view, which controls the same `\.editMode` enironment value. (Based on what I saw, this button appears to change to "Done" during editing.)

(**Note on data flow**: We add a profile object to the environment, but we pass the profile page a _copy_ of this profile (to avoid unintentional edits until confirmed). We store this draft in state in the profile page, and pass it as a binding to the `ProfileEditor` that we’ll see in a second.)

Our view then reads `editMode?.wrappedValue === .inactive` (this `?.wrappedValue` just _looks_ wrong, so I need to understand why it’s not) to decide whether to show the profile or the editor.

Now we build our `ProfileEditor` view:

- it’s a `List` of (`HStack`, `Spacer`, `TextField`), which (magically?) looks like a nice form
  - actually, not that magic; to make it look right we also set `.foregroundStyle(.secondary)` and `.multilineTextAlignment(.trailing)` which now raises of the question of whether this is stuff you’ve gotta do whenever you want to make a generic-looking form?
- this view has a `@Binding var profile: Profile` property
- this is our first introduction to `TextField`; we pass it `…, text: $profile.username)`
  - why does `TextField` have a first argument that is just a string? I thought that we usually have some sort of closure that takes generic label content?
- note that in our `#Preview` we pass a `.constant` binding. What does this mean for the text field? It appears that I can change the text but when I press the Enter key it reverts to the original value. Understand this better.
- ah, and for a `Bool` property the switch in the preview just doesn’t switch
- next we get our first exposure to the `Picker` control, which on iPhone starts off as the selected value and when tapped does a little popover for you to choose a value from. It takes a `selection:` binding. And then — I thought it would be like a `List` but the example we see doesn’t take an array, rather we use a `ForEach` for the content. And we just use a simple `Text` for each of the rows.
  - same question re its label as for `TextField` (maybe both options exist, I don’t know)
  - oh, we also set `.tag(season)` on each of these `Text` views. I think this allows the picker to decide which of these `Text` should be selected. I guess that’s what it’s used for in a `TabView` too (I was wondering earlier, remember?)
  - **how would this be implemented internally? How does `Picker` access the value that I passed to the `tag` modifier?** (This is like the opposite of environment; it’s a parent trying to discover something about its child…)
- one final new view for us to see: `DatePicker`.
  - again takes a `selection` binding, and you give it a range of dates it should allow, which is a `ClosedRange<Date>` (I think that e.g. populating this is something that you’d want some sort of view model-ish thing for)
  - mysteriously, unlike my confusion about `TextField` and `Picker`, this one takes its label via a closure and you’ve got to create a `Text`

(It would be worth at some point understanding exactly what a `Binding` is and how SwiftUI interacts with one; I remember reading somewhere that it’s really just a pair of set/get functions.)

OK, we’re finally going to see how to delay edit propagation (well, we've already been doing that; I guess what we’re actually doing is seeing how to commit once done).

Right, first we add a cancel button, which has `(…, role: .cancel)` (what’s that?), and when tapped resets the draft profile: `draftProfile = modelData.profile`. It also does `editMode?.animation().wrappedValue = .inactive`.

(**What’s `editMode?.animation()`?** Something to look into when understanding `Binding`.)

OK, and then the final step, where I expected something cool, was a bit odd. The profile page applies the (new to us) `.onAppear` and `.onDisappear` modifiers to its `ProfileEditor`, and in `onDisappear` (which it assumes it called because the user has tapped the `Done` button — i.e. it relies on some effect of `EditButton` which is a bit odd) it updates the global model with the `draftProfile`.

### Framework integration

TODO: OK, all that’s left for this tutorial is to do:

- Interfacing with UIKit
- Creating a watchOS app
- Creating a macOS app

##### Interfacing with UIKit

We”re going to embed a `UIPageViewController` inside our SwiftUI view.

- You do this by creating a `View` that conforms to the `UIViewRepresentable` or `UIViewControllerRepresentable` SwiftUI protocols.
- so we declare a view, with generic parameter `<Page: View>` and `var pages: [Page]` (why is it important to have this be generic instead of `any View`? I think this is a similar question to before; wouldn’t be surprised if it’s something to do with type metadata)
- (for some reason the tutorial doesn’t create `#Preview`s for this view)
- `UIViewControllerRepresentable` views don’t seem to implement the `body` property; instead they provide `makeUIViewController(context:)` and `updateUIViewController(context:)` methods
- to embed our SwiftUI pages inside the `UIPageViewController`, we use `UIHostingViewController(rootView: ourSwiftUIView)`

To implement the page view controller’s `dataSource`, we implement `UIViewControllerRepresentable`’s `makeCoordinator()` method. This will return an object of our new class `Coordinator: NSObject`, which will implement the Cocoa pattern.

This coordinator is then accessible inside the aforementioned `make/updateUIViewController` via the `context.coordinator` property.

So, we implement, on our coordinator, the `pageViewController(_:viewControllerBefore/After:)` methods.

(**Note:** I’m not going to think about this UIKit stuff in too much detail right now, especially how the coordinator maintains a reference to the SwiftUI view that created it; it seems like a mix of a long-lived object with a throwaway template and it’s a mix that doesn’t seem immediately intuitive.)

OK, now we add a piece of state on the view that holds this view controller, in order to control the current page number. We then see how to update this state inside the page view controller delegate so that the binding is two way.

Next we see, similarly, how to wrap a `UIPageControl` in a `UIViewRepresentable`, and we similarly hook up target-action to the coordinator.

##### Creating a watchOS app

- we create a new target watchOS App target (named `WatchLandmarks`) in our project, and we choose the "Watch App for Existing iOS App" option
- in the target’s General settings, we choose "Supports Running Without iOS App Installation"
- now we add a bunch of general-purpose views and models to the target
- now we create a target-specific `LandmarkDetail` view to replace that in the main target

TIL you can have multiple asset catalogs in a target.

(**TODO** again we see use of the `landmark.image.resizable()` and the `.scaledToFill()` modifier; get comfortable with those)

Then there’s something I don’t understand to do with fiddling with the image so it behaves well in a scroll view

Note that the `NavigationSplitView` on watchOS presents things in what I’d call a modal style, with a little list button to return to the list.

Now we’ll take a look at how to create a notification view (not sure exactly what that means; let’s see).

So, we first just create a normal SwiftUI view, and then we subclass `WKUserNotificationHostingController` (parameterised by our view type) from the `WatchKit` framework. We implement its `body` to return our view, and we implement `didReceive(_ notification: UNNotification)` (where `UNNotification` is from the `UserNotifications` framework) which populate some properties that somehow find their way into that SwiftUI view.

Then to hook this thing up to the app, seems like you have to include a `WKNotificationScene` in your view hierarchy (I don’t know why it’s a view and not a modifier, shrug). They include it inside the app’s `Scene` (is the exact location important?) using an `#if os(watchOS)`.

Then we see how to request notification permissions, which we just do by calling `UNUserNotifcationCenter#requestAuthorization` in the usual way. This is an `async` method and we call it inside a `.task` modifier.

It then tries to show us how to view the notification by creating a "Notification Simulation File" and dragging it on the simulator watch face, but this doesn’t work for me and I shan’t investigate it now.

##### Creating a macOS app

We start by adding a macOS target.

- we see using `.frame(minWidth:minHeight:)`
- we create _another_ `LandmarkDetail` view

  > You now have three files called `LandmarkDetail`. Each serves the same purpose in the view hierarchy, but provides an experience tailored to a particular platform.

- we copy and paste the iOS one, it fails because `.navigationBarTitleDisplayMode(_:)` doesn’t exist on macOS, so we delete that modifier
- couple of things to note about this same view but on macOS:

  1. the `NavigationSplitView` is a single window with a sidebar
  2. the `Toggle` is a check box

- now they do a bunch of visual rearranging in the macOS version
- notice they use `.frame(maxWidth: 700)` on a text container for readability at large widths
- the `FavoriteButton` currently looks like an old-school button with a border; we do `.buttonStyle(.plain)` (another one to look at) to make it look like it does on iOS

Now,

> The larger display gives you more room for additional features.

- so we a button which opens the place in the Maps app (button action calls `MKMapItem#openInMaps()`)
- I just noticed that the `alignment` you pass to e.g. `ZStack` is actually an instance of `Alignment`, which has an initializer they use as `Alignment(horizontal: .trailing, vertical: .top)` in this example
- we set a `.frame(minWidth:)` on our `NavigationSplitView`’s sidebar content

> For the row, using conditional compilation is appropriate because the differences are small.

OK, we’re going to now move the favourites toggle to a menu on macOS.

- we make use of the `toolbar` modifier again, but this time we put two new views inside it: a `ToolbarItem` (?) containing a `Menu` (?), where `Menu` has a `label` and an action.

(_Oh_, I see, I think that they mean a dropdown menu that pops up when you click a toolbar button, not a menu bar button.)

- now we add another `Picker` to this `Menu`, for choosing a category of location. Interestingly, this `Picker` appears as a list directly within the menu on iOS (another example of "hmm how exactly does that work"?) We decide that we want the same inline behaviour on macOS too, where we have to use the `.pickerStyle(.inline)` modifier (as I think I asked about something else — or maybe this — earlier, why is this a modifier and not just an initializer property of the `Picker`?)

OK, I think _now_ we’re going to look at menu bar menus.

We're going to start by adding a menu command for restoring the sidebar (if the user accidentally closes it and ignoring there’s a button for doing so).

We create a `LandmarkCommands` structure that extends SwiftUI’s `Commands`. It has a `var body: some Commands`. And then in this body, we include `SidebarCommands`, which is a _built-in command set_, including a command for toggling the sidebar.

> To make use of commands in an app, you have to apply them to a scene, which you’ll do next.

(What is a scene?) — I don’t know, but we apply the `.commands` modifier to the `WindowGroup` in the app.

> Scene modifiers work like view modifiers, except that you apply them to scenes instead of views.

And now, _magically_, the View > Show Sidebar menu has appeared!

Now, having seen how to add a built-in menu command, we’ll add a custom one for toggling the favourited-ness of the selected landmark.

Now begins something that I’ll vaguely follow.

- create struct `SelectedLandmarkKey` which implements SwiftUI’s `FocusedValueKey` protocol

  no idea what this is, focus seems to be some sort of SwiftUI concept though, and I think that the thing we favourite will in some sense be a "focussed" view

- and we extend the SwiftUI `FocusedValues` type, adding a `selectedLandmark: Binding<Landmark>?` property
- apparently this is similar to what we do with environment (shrug, look at this once I understand that better, I guess):

  > The pattern for defining focused values resembles the pattern for defining new `Environment` values: Use a private key to read and write a custom property on the system-defined `FocusedValues` structure.

- ah, and then in the `LandmarkCommands` we add this new-to-us property wrapper `@FocusedBinding(\.selectedLandmark) var selectedLandmark` (hopefully this will become clearer on a second look once I’m familiar with whatever this pattern that mimics `Environment` is)
- now to add a new menu, we add the new-to-us `CommandMenu("Landmark")` in the `LandmarkComamnds` `body`.
- then we stick a button in this, and we make its action toggle `selectedLandmark?.isFavorite`
- we also make use of the new-to-us `.disabled(_:)` modifier to disable the button if there’s no `selectedLandmark`
- we also add a keyboard shortcut for it, using the new-to-us `.keyboardShortcut("f", modifiers: [.shift, .option])`

OK, so we’ve got the menu in place, and it’ll do stuff with the `selectedLandmark`. How do we populate that based on what the user’s selected?

- well, we see how we can pass `List`’s initializer a `selection` binding, which will be updated with the selected landmark

  again, I think that it uses the view’s `.tag(_:)` to identify the right one

- now we (and am at a point of just trying to get to the end of this now) use the `.focusedValue(\.selectedLandmark, $modelData.landmarks[index ?? 0])` modifier. There’s another use of the mysterious `@Bindable` again as a local variable (seen that a few times now)

(**Aside: ** I think I was wondering earlier about how to pass things up view hierarchy, e.g. how `.tag` gets interrogated. Someone asked the same thing in this [Reddit question](https://www.reddit.com/r/SwiftUI/comments/grld3a/how_to_access_tags_which_where_set_by_tagssometag/). Sounds like `Preferences` is the general mechanism for passing stuff up the view hierarchy.)

Finally, we're going to add an in-app "MacLandmarks > Settings" menu (i.e. the standard settings menu). We’ll use it to control the initial map zoom level.

- well, first of all we’re introduced to the `@AppStorage(_:)` property wrapper, which takes a string user defaults key and I guess takes care of reading and writing to user defaults? we add, inside our map view, `@AppStorage("MapView.zoom") private var zoom: Zoom = .medium` (where `Zoom` is an enum of our creation)
- now we create a view for our settings screen, and we grab the same property via `@AppStorage` (I note that both views are defining their own default values; shouldn’t this be coordinated in some way, even if just through a shared constant?)
- now we construct the UI, which uses a `Picker`. but it does so within the new-to-us `Form`, saying:

> You typically use a `Form` to arrange controls in your settings view.

(Why only in the settings view?) (Also, I notice that the `Picker` appears as a list of radio buttons; is this `Form`’s doing? Or is that because we’ve used `.pickerStyle(.inline)`? Or both? Ah, yeah, it’s because of `.inline`; without that then the form shows a `<select>`-style thingy.)

- I notice that the `.navigationTitle(_:)` here sets the window’s title bar text.

And then, finally, we add the new-to-us `Settings` scene inside the app’s `body`, with content of our settings view.

From the test at the end, note that the picker’s selection type must be `Hashable`.

Well, that’s it for this tutorial! There was a lot to take in, and I definitely switched off for a decent chunk of it. But working with SwiftUI and discovering all the different APIs is something that seems very exciting and cool to me, so that’s a good thing I guess.
